---
title: 'Tower, Episode 2: calling a Tower Service'
date: 2022-10-23
tags:
- rust
- tokio
- tower
---

In the [previous episode](/2022/10/21/2022-10-21-tower-1) we have seen that a Tower service is made up of the two methods `poll_ready` and `call`, which are subject to the following contract: callers first must invoke `poll_ready` until it returns `Poll::Ready` before they can invoke `call`, else `call` might panic.

This is the signature of `poll_ready`:

```rust
fn poll_ready(&mut self, cx: &mut Context<'_>) -> Poll<Result<(), Self::Error>>;
```

In order to invoke `poll_ready`, we need a `std::task::Context`. If you are familiar with `Future`s, you will notice that its `poll` method also has such an argument. So do we have to implement a `Future` just to call a service?

Luckily not, because Tower already provides the `ServiceExt` trait with some helper methods to either invoke `poll_ready` or even chain invoking `poll_ready` and `call` according to their contract.s

Let's first take a look at `ServiceExt::oneshot`. According to the [documentation](https://docs.rs/tower/latest/tower/trait.ServiceExt.html#method.oneshot), it "consumes this service, calling with the provided request once it is ready".

```rust
let mut service = EchoService;
let response = service.oneshot("Hello, Tower!".into()).await?;
println!("Echo service responded with: {response}");
```

The `Future` returned by `oneshot` first invokes `poll_ready` when `poll`ed and then, if the service returns `Poll::Ready`, invokes `call`. Of course it's not possible to invoke the service again, because `oneshot` consumes it by taking it as `self`. But it actually is the only way provided by Tower enforcing the contract between `poll_ready` and `call`.

Next let's take a look at `ServiceExt::ready`, which, according to the [documentation](https://docs.rs/tower/latest/tower/trait.ServiceExt.html#method.ready), "yields a mutable reference to the service when it is ready to accept a request".

```rust
let mut service = EchoService;

let service = service.ready().await?;
let response = service.call("Hello, Tower!".into()).await?;
println!("Echo service responded with: {response}");

// We should invoke `ready` once again before invoking `call`!
// service.ready().await?;
let response = service.call("Hello again, Tower!".into()).await?;
println!("Echo service responded with: {response}");
```

The `Future` returned by `ready` returns a mutable reference to the service which then can be used to `call` it. As you can see from the above, we can even `call` the service several times without checking its readiness. Of course this is against the contract and we should instead invoke `ready` once again every time before we invoke `call`, i.e. in the above code snippet we should uncomment line 8.

Finally there is `ServiceExt::ready_oneshot`. It works like `ready`, but it consumes the service.

```rust
let service = EchoService;

let mut service = service.ready_oneshot().await?;
let response = service.call("Hello, Tower!".into()).await?;
println!("Echo service responded with: {response}");

// We should invoke `ready_oneshot` once again before invoking `call`!
// let mut service = service.ready_oneshot().await?;
let response = service.call("Hello again, Tower!".into()).await?;
println!("Echo service responded with: {response}");
```

Like for `ready`, we can `call` the returned service several times without checking its readiness. Therefore I consider this method misnamed, because "oneshot" for me means, well, no more than one invocation of `call`.

You might now ask whether this service contract of always invoking `poll_ready` before `call` really matters that much. Well, not for our harmless `EchoService` which is always ready and therefore its `call` method never panics. Let's look at some other service, behaving less nicely, in the next episode. As usual the full code is available in [tower-experiments on GitHub](https://github.com/hseeberger/tower-experiments).
